- Introduction:
    - Hello. I'm Ryan Peterson and "R.P" on Twitter (@resonantpyre). I am a college student at UChicago. Other relevant personal details may be mentioned in future as needed. 
    -  I've made this site to upload some notes and eventually essays for topics I'm reading about and researching. For the moment, I'll just be sharing this with friends, Twitter followers. When I have more succinct essays that express clear, useful points I may make more of an effort to share them. Of course, feel free to share anything from here you like, but I think while I try to get in the habit of writing I'll probably produce a lot of garbage. 
    - But since expressing knowledge is the only way to confirm that you have it, this is an acceptable trade off. Indeed, if one learns that one does __not__ have knowledge, this is still a kind of useful knowledge. I would guess that my ability to communicate successfully and write well will be more of a bottleneck than knowledge, however, which flows free and easily everywhere I look (Libgen, mostly). I'm happy to eventually try to contribute new knowledge to the word too, but I make no promises there.  My only promise is to begin where I am and sail towards truth: 
        - "__We are like sailors who on the open sea must reconstruct their ship but are never able to start afresh from the bottom. Where a beam is taken away a new one must at once be put there, and for this the rest of the ship is used as support. In this way, by using the old beams and driftwood the ship can be shaped entirely anew, but only by gradual reconstruction__"
    - So that's my main announcement, read on if you would like some rambling info on what exactly I will have here, and a few influences for this sort of genre. 
    - More about the form of the content: Notes will probably be decent amount of quotes, small amount of analysis / questions, sometimes will be compiled around a theme or larger topic. Cosma Shalizi has the best pure collection of notes I've seen on the internet: http://bactra.org/notebooks/. 
    - https://www.gwern.net/ is a role model for more heavily researched articles and elegant presentation of a lot of information at once. Slatestarcodex.com was an early role model for me in terms of online essays about a variety of intellectual topics, in particular I hope to reach the quality of his book reviews.
    -  I will mostly stay away from the object level back and forth of partisan politics not having anything useful to add, but I might venture into political concepts to clarify my understanding of the political phenomena and describe or propose interesting future political possibilities. I admire https://scholars-stage.blogspot.com/ for their back and forth discussion of history and politics, and recommend https://palladiummag.com/ for contemporary analysis. 
    - I initially intend to have a more 'notes' section that is distinct for section for tighter, shorter essays presenting a more specific argument or tight chain of facts (like a book review, or attempt to answer with reference to historical evidence a question like "what factors caused and enabled the spread of democracy, historically?", for example). There will be some amount of shared subject matter between the two sections, but I wanted to have a separate section for more epistemically humble and digressive musings and to catalog my journey through a new body of knowledge to get easy input or advice from those knowledgable in field. 
    - I've said really nothing about the specific subject matter, it is a fair assumption that I will cover the same sphere of topics  I seem to to talk about on Twitter, whatever that is. None the less, here are a few ideas, motivating concerns for essays / notes pages I may cover in the next few weeks, sketched out without much context. I suggest skimming through at most, unless one draws your eye. 
        - Saussure, in the context of his linguistic study in "Course in General Linguistics", introduced a distinction between a "diachronic" and a "synchronic" analysis. A diachronic analysis analyzes the evolution of its subject over time. A synchronic analysis analyzes its subject in moment in time, whatever the relevant unit of time may be. This is an important distinction in linguistics, as the meaning of a word might change immensely over time and studying this can illuminate facts about the language phenomena; this information does not change the synchronic fact of the meaning of that word to the ordinary language user in the present, however. 
            -  I am interested in thinking about this synchronic / diachronic distinction in analyses of other concepts, both words and the concepts associated with them, and how mixing the two up can mislead. For example, one popular account of the formation of early states associates their beginnings with warlords, brutal subjugation. We might trace the evolution of the state from that. But this does not necessarily have implications for the current functioning of the state and peoples understandings of it, although people might *make* it relevant in discourse. 
        - There are two related things I would like to understand better. 
            - 1. The distinction between the political "left" and the political "right" both its origin (French Revolution?), evolution, current basis and possible future. Related but distinct political identifiers are "conservative", "liberal", "progressive", and indeed, "socialist". This is by no means an a priori study, I intend to reference both people that addressed this topic and directly review the relevant history, see contemporary usage of the terms –– a decent amount of mid to low brow political debate degenerates into claims about which of these sides is dominant, controls what areas of political life, or is associated with X political villain (be it Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union). Understanding each of these respective traditions adequately deserves a full series of its own but the start to one may be illuminating them via their differences (I take it as a given that our current Western political order is broadly described as varying degrees of liberal on both sides, liberal as in liberal democracy). 
            - 2. The idea of a theory of history and the idea of an end to history, especially in the traditions of the philosophers Hegel, Marx, Kojeve and their contemporary explicator (famously in End of History and the Last Man), Fukuyama. I am, however, also interested in theories of history that are less historicist and perhaps that try to be more scientific in the modern sense (Caroll Quigley's The Evolution of Civilizations is a notable 1961 attempt I am reading currently). I have a book by the contemporary attempter at more scientific theories of history ("cliodynamics"), Peter Turchin.  A theory of history, successful or not, is important to understanding the distinction between left and right as these sides have often conceived of themselves in relation to an implicit or explicit theory of history (or its negation). Progressives refer to an ideal of progress, conservatives resist this notion, and contemporary fringe if online reactionaries flip around progress to a similarly inevitable decline: for example: "Cthulhu may swim slowly. But he only swims left". One should be rightly sceptical of a truly grand and certain theory of history but it may have its place within certain limits (if such and such condition continues, X factors will continue and reach Y equilibrium while condition continues). In particular, I suspect the continuing innovation in technology poses a threat to theories of history that try to predict the future. 
        - I am interested in philosophical theories of truth and understanding better the role of knowledge, information in society and the intersection of these two topics. I will try to review existing major theories of truth and the minimum satisfactory criticisms of them, and then introduce the American pragmatist Peirce's theory of the meaning of truth as "the end of inquiry" which I think may be a productive line of thought –– I am interested in understanding it theoretically and then in the context of different domains; what institutional, societal conditions enable the convergence of inquiry in a particular subject matter? 
            - James Scott in Seeing Like a State and Hayek in multiple papers provide compelling ideas about different *sorts* of knowledge ("metis" and "techne" according to Scott, briefly paraphrased as 'practical knowledge' and 'scientific rational knowledge') embedded in society and its difference from more institutional and scientific objective forms of knowledge. I am interested in clarifying this distinction and using it to understand various failures and successes in government, other top down projects –– I have an essay in the works related to Covid-19 institutional failures and this framework.
            - In general, I would like to better understand the retrieval and distribution of information and the various societal, economic and political implications in past and present –– this topic spans from written language, the printing press, to the computer and presently, different forms of social media. Even when there is not censorship, the explicit and implicit selection mechanisms determining what information people access and consume will inevitably direct peoples attention in some manner or another. Given that people are not able to verify the vast majority of the information and knowledge given to them (although in a modern scientific society, they know it is in some sense out there for any given phenomena, this is the disenchantment Weber elegantly describes), an analysis of trust and the social role of the expert can explain what people do with the knowledge distributed to them exactly. 
