- In his 1961 book __The Evolution of Civilizations__, Carroll Quigley coins the term "instrument of expansion" to describe a social technology enabling the growth of a society. He names three societal conditions for it to succeed at this task:

    -  (1) the society must be organized in such a way that it has an incentive to invent new ways of doing things
    - (2) it must be organized in such a way that somewhere in
the society there is accumulation of surplus—that is, some
persons in the society control more wealth than they wish
to consume immediately"
    - (3) it must be organized in such a way that the surplus which is being accumulated is being used to pay for or to utilize the new inventions.
    
- Quigley analyzes the institution of slavery in the Greco-Roman world with this framework in mind, particularly the practice slavery in agriculture which is where he says it had its primary economic function. I paraphrase and describe his analysis below, focusing in on a Roman context specifically. I am not very familiar with the research on this topic besides general historical impressions and this book so keep that in mind, feel free to let me know of any errors or recommended modern sources on this topic. 
- Slavery arose in the beginning of classical civilization (Greeks, Romans, etc from 950 B.C. to 550 A.D) from the Iron Age Indo-European conquests of the inhabitants of the Mediterranean Basin. The form it first took was domestic rather than plantation style –– owners and their families had a few to several slaves who they lived with and supervised on their agricultural estates.   
- This local and involved character enabled slaveowners to see possible improvements in agricultural techniques and invest surpluses into implementing these improvements.  
- He describes the role of slavery in classical civilization thus:
    - > "The instrument of expansion of Classical civilization was a social organization, slavery. This came into existence in the period of mixture as a consequence of the invasions of the Iron Age intruders. It remained an instrument so long as the slaveowners worked closely with their slaves, often in the fields themselves, as Cincinnatus was doing when appointed dictator, because then the surplus from the slave labor which accumulated to the owner from his legal rights over his slaves could be used for some productive use, since the owner's personal knowledge of the agricultural process permitted him to judge where such investment could best be made." (270)
- Later on, slaves worked on farms under appointed stewards who were usually freed slaves. With little incentive to innovate or generate excessive surpluses that they would not gain from, the steward system became inefficient compared to family farms which the owner directly ran  (stewards would settle on a low but stable output to satisfy employer, enabled by a relatively agriculture-ignorant and absentee land owner). The destruction of Roman family farms owned by citizen-soldiers during the Second Punic War and the displaced peasants selling their ravaged farms to  wealthy land owners or war profiteers helped lead to the creation of these large estates with the steward system despite its inefficiency. 
- Additionally, matters of prestige drove more and more successful people from other parts of society to buy into this way of life. The reduction and stagnation of agricultural productivity was somewhat concealed and hidden by the continual military expansion of the Roman Republic and empire during this time (200 B.C. to A.D. 200 is when Quigley places the stagnation, and finally beginning of absolute decline). He describes the social dynamics at play:
    - > "One last but important factor in this change to large estates was the fact that landownership carried an appearance of aristocracy and social prestige, since the nobility were by law excluded from commerce, and restricted their economic activities to agriculture. As a result, every parvenu who made money in commerce, industry, speculation, or war contracts sought to win public sanction of his rise in the social scale by acquiring a large estate—the larger, the better. In this way many persons with no direct knowledge or interest in farming became owners of latifundia worked by slaves in charge of a steward. In consequence there grew up a pattern of ostentatious display of landed luxury, great debts, and separation of management from ownership" (318)
- Dependence on a stagnant and declining form of production was exacerbated by dynamics unique to slavery that led to a declining supply that spurred political turmoil,  provided impetus for war in order to get new slaves. His explanation of the dynamics:
    - > "No slave system has ever been able to continue to function on the slaves provided by its own biological reproduction because the rate of human reproduction is too slow and the expense from infant mortality and years of unproductive upkeep of the young make this prohibitively expensive." (318)
- All this is interesting in itself, but is quite revealing of the effect of incentive on innovation in general. It seems likely that there are 'prestige traps' in the modern west today, sinecures that repress innovation in the holder and those employed under them. Maybe I will explore this analogy further another time.
